README.asciidoc, before:

= kitty - A terminal emulator
:toc:
:toc-placement!:
// START_SHORTCUT_BLOCK
:sc_close_tab: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+q`]
:sc_close_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+w`]
:sc_copy_to_clipboard: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+c`]
:sc_decrease_font_size: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+minus`]
:sc_eighth_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+8`]
:sc_fifth_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+5`]
:sc_first_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+1`]
:sc_fourth_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+4`]
:sc_increase_font_size: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+equal`]
:sc_move_tab_backward: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+,`]
:sc_move_tab_forward: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+.`]
:sc_move_window_backward: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+b`]
:sc_move_window_forward: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+f`]
:sc_move_window_to_top: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+``]
:sc_new_os_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+n`]
:sc_new_tab: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+t`]
:sc_new_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+enter`]
:sc_next_layout: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+l`]
:sc_next_tab: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+right`]
:sc_next_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+]`]
:sc_ninth_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+9`]
:sc_pass_selection_to_program: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+o`]
:sc_paste_from_clipboard: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+v`]
:sc_paste_from_selection: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+s` or `shift+insert`]
:sc_previous_tab: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+left`]
:sc_previous_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+[`]
:sc_restore_font_size: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+backspace`]
:sc_scroll_end: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+end`]
:sc_scroll_home: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+home`]
:sc_scroll_line_down: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+down` or `ctrl+shift+j`]
:sc_scroll_line_up: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+up` or `ctrl+shift+k`]
:sc_scroll_page_down: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+page_down`]
:sc_scroll_page_up: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+page_up`]
:sc_second_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+2`]
:sc_seventh_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+7`]
:sc_show_scrollback: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+h`]
:sc_sixth_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+6`]
:sc_tenth_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+0`]
:sc_third_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+3`]
:sc_toggle_fullscreen: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+f11`]
// END_SHORTCUT_BLOCK

++++
<img align="left" role="left" src="logo/kitty.png?raw=true"/>
++++
image::https://travis-ci.org/kovidgoyal/kitty.svg?branch=master[Build status, link=https://travis-ci.org/kovidgoyal/kitty]

== Major Features

* Supports tiling multiple terminal windows side by side in different
layouts without needing to use an extra program like tmux

* Supports all modern terminal features: graphics (images), unicode,
true-color, OpenType ligatures, mouse protocol, focus tracking, bracketed paste and so on.

* Supports startup sessions which allow you to specify the window/tab layout,
working directories and programs to run on startup.

* Uses OpenGL for rendering, offloads rendering to the GPU for lower system
load and buttery smooth scrolling. Uses threaded rendering to minimize input
latency.

* Cross-platform support: kitty currently works on Linux and macOS, but because
it uses only OpenGL for rendering, it should be trivial to port to other
platforms.

* Allows you to open the scrollback buffer and window contents in a separate
window using arbitrary programs of your choice. This is useful for browsing
the history comfortably in a pager or editor and also for doing things like
opening URLs using only the keyboard.

* Easily hackable (UI layer written in python, inner loops in C for
speed). Less than fifteen thousand lines of code.

image::screenshot.png?raw=true[Screenshot, showing three programs in the "Tall" layout]

toc::[]


== Installation

kitty is designed to run from source, for easy hackability. Make sure
the following dependencies are installed first.

=== Dependencies

* python >= 3.5
* harfbuzz >= 1.5.0
* libunistring
* zlib
* libpng
* freetype (not needed on macOS)
* fontconfig (not needed on macOS)
* ImageMagick (optional, needed to use the `kitty icat` tool to display images in the terminal)
* gcc or clang (required only for building)
* pkg-config (required only for building)
* For building on linux in addition to the above dependencies you might also need to install the `-dev` packages for `xcursor`, `xrandr`, `xinerama` and `xkbcommon-x11`, if they are not already installed by your distro.

=== Install and run from source

....
git clone https://github.com/kovidgoyal/kitty && cd kitty
....

Now build the C parts of kitty with the following command:

....
python3 setup.py build
....

You can run kitty, as:

....
python3 /path/to/kitty/folder
....

=== Linux packages

* Arch Linux: AUR git package https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/kitty-git/

* Arch Linux: AUR stable package https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/kitty/

* NixOS / nixpkgs: https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/applications/misc/kitty/default.nix


=== macOS packages

kitty is available as a macOS `dmg` file for easy installation from the
link:../../releases[releases page].  You can also run kitty directly from
source using the above install from source instructions, after installing its
dependencies using http://brew.sh/[brew] or a similar package manager.


== Design philosophy

kitty is designed for power keyboard users. To that end all its controls
work with the keyboard (although it fully supports mouse interactions as
well). Its configuration is a simple, human editable, single file for
easy reproducibility (I like to store config files in source control).

The code in kitty is designed to be simple, modular and hackable. It is
written in a mix of C (for performance sensitive parts) and Python (for
easy hackability of the UI). It does not depend on any large and complex
UI toolkit, using only OpenGL for rendering everything.

Finally, kitty is designed from the ground up to support all modern
terminal features, such as unicode, true color, bold/italic fonts, text
formatting, etc. It even extends existing text formatting escape codes,
to add support for features not available elsewhere, such as colored and
styled (curly) underlines. One of the design goals of kitty is to be
easily extensible so that new features can be added in the future with
relatively less effort.

== Tabs and Windows

kitty is capable of running multiple programs organized into tabs and
windows. The top level of organization is the _Tab_. Each tab consists
of one or more _windows_. The windows can be arranged in multiple
different layouts, like windows are organized in a tiling window
manager. The keyboard controls (which are all customizable) for tabs and
windows are:

[[scrolling-shortcuts]]
[options="header"]

=== Scrolling

|===
|Action |Shortcut

|Scroll line up   | {sc_scroll_line_up}
|Scroll line down | {sc_scroll_line_down}
|Scroll page up   | {sc_scroll_page_up}
|Scroll page down | {sc_scroll_page_down}
|Scroll to top    | {sc_scroll_home}
|Scroll to bottom | {sc_scroll_end}

|===

[options="header"]

=== Tabs

|===
|Action |Shortcut

|New tab   | {sc_new_tab}
|Close tab | {sc_close_tab}
|Next tab  | {sc_next_tab}
|Previous tab | {sc_previous_tab}
|Next layout | {sc_next_layout}
|Move tab forward | {sc_move_tab_forward}
|Move tab backward | {sc_move_tab_backward}

|===


[options="header"]

=== Windows

|===
|Action |Shortcut

|New window   | {sc_new_window}
|New OS window| {sc_new_os_window}
|Close window | {sc_close_window}
|Next window  | {sc_next_window}
|Previous window | {sc_previous_window}
|Move window forward | {sc_move_window_forward}
|Move window backward | {sc_move_window_backward}
|Move window to top | {sc_move_window_to_top}
|Focus specific window (windows are counted clockwise from the top left corner) | {sc_first_window}, {sc_second_window} ... {sc_tenth_window}

|===

=== Miscellaneous

|===
|Action |Shortcut

|Increase font size   | {sc_increase_font_size}
|Decrease font size   | {sc_decrease_font_size}
|Restore font size    | {sc_restore_font_size}
|Toggle fullscreen    | {sc_toggle_fullscreen}
|Pass current selection to program | {sc_pass_selection_to_program}
|===



== The scrollback buffer

kitty supports scrolling back to view history, just like most terminals. You
can use either the <<scrolling-shortcuts,keyboard shortcuts>> or the mouse
scroll wheel to do so.  However, kitty has an extra, neat feature. Sometimes you
need to explore the scrollback buffer in more detail, maybe search for some
text or refer to it side-by-side while typing in a follow-up command. kitty
allows you to do this by pressing the {sc_show_scrollback} key-combination,
which will open the scrollback buffer in a new window, using your favorite
pager program (which is `less` by default). You can then explore the scrollback
buffer using whatever program you normally use. Colors and text formatting are
preserved.


== Miscellaneous features

You can double click to select a word and triple click to select a line. You can also
hold down `ctrl+shift` and click on a URL to open it in a browser.


== Layouts

Currently, there are three layouts available,

* Stack -- Only a single maximized window is shown at a time
* Tall -- One window is shown full height on the left, the rest of the windows are shown one below the other on the right.
* Grid -- All windows are shown in a grid

You can switch between layouts using the {sc_next_layout} key combination.

Writing a new layout only requires about fifty lines of code, so if there is
some layout you want, take a look at link:kitty/layout.py[layout.py] and submit
a pull request!


== Configuration

kitty is highly customizable, everything from keyboard shortcuts, to
painting frames-per-second. See the heavily commented
link:kitty/kitty.conf[default config file]. By default kitty looks for a
config file in the OS config directory (usually
`~/.config/kitty/kitty.conf` on Linux and
`~/Library/Preferences/kitty/kitty.conf` on macOS) but you can pass a specific
path via the `--config` option.

== Startup Sessions

You can control the tabs, window layout, working directory, startup
programs, etc. by creating a "session" file and using the `--session`
command line flag. For example:

....
# Set the window layout for the current tab
layout tall
# Set the working directory for windows in the current tab
cd ~
# Create a window and run the specified command in it
launch zsh
launch vim
launch irssi --profile x

# Create a new tab (the part after new_tab is the optional tab name which will
# be displayed in the tab bar, if omitted, the title of the active window will
# be used instead)
new_tab my tab
cd ~/somewhere
# Set the layouts allowed in this tab
enabled_layouts tall, stack
# Set the current layout
layout stack
launch zsh
# Make the current window the active (focused) window
focus
launch emacs
....

== Protocol Extensions

kitty has a few extensions to the xterm protocol, to enable advanced features,
see link:protocol-extensions.asciidoc[Protocol Extensions].


== Font control

kitty has extremely flexible and powerful font selection features. You can
specify individual families for the regular, bold, italic and bold+italic
fonts. You can even specify specific font families for specific ranges of
unicode characters. This allows precise control over text rendering. It can
come in handy for applications like powerline, without the need to use patched
fonts. See the various font related configuration directives in the
link:kitty/kitty.conf[config file].

== Performance

The main goals for kitty performance are user perceived latency while typing
and "smoothness" while scrolling as well as CPU usage. kitty tries hard to find
an optimum balance for these. To that end it keeps a cache of each rendered
glyph in video RAM so that font rendering is not a bottleneck.  Interaction
with child programs takes place in a separate thread from rendering, to improve
smoothness.

There are two parameters you can tune to adjust the performance. ``repaint_delay``
and ``input_delay``. These control the artificial delays introduced into the
render loop to reduce CPU usage. See the link:kitty/kitty.conf[config file] for details.

You can generate detailed per-function performance data using
link:https://github.com/gperftools/gperftools[gperftools]. Build kitty with the
`--profile` flag which will create an executable called `kitty-profile`.  Run
that and perform the task you want to analyse, for example, scrolling a large
file with `less`. After you quit, function call statistics will be printed to
`stdout` and you can use tools like *kcachegrind* for more detailed analysis.

Here are some CPU usage numbers for the task of scrolling a file continuously in less.
The CPU usage is for the terminal process and X together and is measured using htop.
The measurements are taken at the same font and window size for all terminals on a
`Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-4820K CPU @ 3.70GHz` CPU with a
`Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. [AMD/ATI] Cape Verde XT [Radeon HD 7770/8760 / R7 250X]` GPU.

|===
| Terminal | CPU usage (X + terminal)

| kitty    | 6 - 8%
| xterm    | 5 - 7% (but scrolling was extremely janky)
| termite  | 10 - 13%
| urxvt    | 12 - 14%
| gnome-terminal | 15 - 17%
| konsole  | 29 - 31%

|===

As you can see, kitty uses much less CPU than all terminals, except xterm, but
its scrolling "smoothness" is much better than that of xterm (at least to my,
admittedly biased, eyes).

== Note for Linux/macOS packagers

While kitty does use python, it is not a traditional python package, so please do not install it in site-packages.
Instead run,

```
python3 setup.py linux-package
```

This will install kitty into the directory `linux-package`. You can run kitty
with `linux-package/bin/kitty`.  All the files needed to run kitty will be in
`linux-package/lib/kitty`. The terminfo file will be installed into
`linux-package/share/terminfo`. Simply copy these files into `/usr` to install
kitty. In other words, `linux-package` is the staging area into which kitty is
installed. You can choose a different staging area, by passing the `--prefix`
argument to `setup.py`.

You should probably split kitty into two packages, `kitty-terminfo` that
installs the terminfo file and `kitty` that installs the main program.
This allows users to install the terminfo file on servers into which they ssh,
without needing to install all of kitty.

This applies to creating packages for kitty for macOS package managers such as
brew or MacPorts as well.


== Frequently Asked Questions

=== Some special symbols are rendered small/truncated in kitty?

The number of cells a unicode character takes up are controlled by the
`wcwidth()` system function. If wcwidth() returns 2 then kitty will render the
character in two cells, otherwise it will render it in one cell. Often the
system `wcwidth()` is old/outdated. You can use the `use_system_wcwidth=no`
setting in your kitty.conf to workaround this. But note that it might cause
other issues, since now kitty and the programs running inside it may not agree
on how wide characters should be. When a symbol does not fit, it will either be
rescaled to be smaller or truncated (depending on how much extra space it
needs). This is often different from other terminals which just let the
character overflow into neighboring cells, leading to ugly artifacts.

In addition to the problem with `wcwidth()` above, some programs, like
powerline, vim with fancy gutter symbols/status-bar, etc. use unicode
characters from the private use area to represent symbols. Often these symbols
are square and should be rendered in two cells.  However, since private use
area symbols all have `wcwdith() == 1` kitty renders them either smaller or
truncated. The correct solution for this is to use either use different symbols
that are not square, or to use a font that defines ligatures with the space
character for these symbols. See
link:https://github.com/kovidgoyal/kitty/issues/182[#182] for a discussion of
the approach using ligatures.

=== How do I build kitty.app on macOS?

You dont need to build kitty.app to run kitty from source. Simply install the dependencies
listed above using brew/MacPorts or similar and then compile and run with:

```
make
python3 .
```

You can also create a shell script to run kitty:

```
#!/bin/sh
exec python3 /path/to/kitty/source/dir
```

And using something like link:https://mathiasbynens.be/notes/shell-script-mac-apps[app-wrapper-for-shell-script]
you can create a simple launcher app to run the shell script.

If you only want to make some small changes to a python file, you can do that
and simply replace the corresponding file inside an existing kitty.app. (Note
that kitty.app will contain `.pyo` files which are compiled versions of `.py`
files, delete the `.pyo` file and replace it with a `.py` file).

Finally, note that the released kitty.dmg is built automatically by using the
`kitty` branch of
link:https://github.com/kovidgoyal/build-calibre[build-calibre] however, that
is designed to run on linux and is not for the faint of heart.

== A tribute

While over the decades I am sure many people have contributed to the
development of the terminal emulator space, there is one individual in
particular I would like to thank. link:http://invisible-island.net[Thomas E.
Dickey], the creator of xterm.  xterm is the most comprehensive and
feature-rich terminal emulator I have had the pleasure of using. As I worked on
kitty, I ran headlong into more and more gnarly corners of terminal behavior.
On all those occasions, either the excellent documentation at
link:http://invisible-island.net/xterm/ctlseqs/ctlseqs.html[xterm-ctlseqs] or
investigating the behavior and code of xterm or vttest were invaluable tools to
aid my understanding.

My achievements, if any, in developing kitty would not have been possible without
his prior work and the generous sharing of knowledge accumulated over decades.

Thank you.


== Resources on terminal behavior

http://invisible-island.net/xterm/ctlseqs/ctlseqs.html

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C0_and_C1_control_codes

http://vt100.net/

Commit message:

Session file: Allow setting the title for windows

README.asciidoc, after:

= kitty - A terminal emulator
:toc:
:toc-placement!:
// START_SHORTCUT_BLOCK
:sc_close_tab: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+q`]
:sc_close_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+w`]
:sc_copy_to_clipboard: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+c`]
:sc_decrease_font_size: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+minus`]
:sc_eighth_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+8`]
:sc_fifth_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+5`]
:sc_first_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+1`]
:sc_fourth_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+4`]
:sc_increase_font_size: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+equal`]
:sc_move_tab_backward: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+,`]
:sc_move_tab_forward: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+.`]
:sc_move_window_backward: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+b`]
:sc_move_window_forward: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+f`]
:sc_move_window_to_top: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+``]
:sc_new_os_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+n`]
:sc_new_tab: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+t`]
:sc_new_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+enter`]
:sc_next_layout: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+l`]
:sc_next_tab: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+right`]
:sc_next_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+]`]
:sc_ninth_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+9`]
:sc_pass_selection_to_program: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+o`]
:sc_paste_from_clipboard: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+v`]
:sc_paste_from_selection: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+s` or `shift+insert`]
:sc_previous_tab: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+left`]
:sc_previous_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+[`]
:sc_restore_font_size: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+backspace`]
:sc_scroll_end: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+end`]
:sc_scroll_home: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+home`]
:sc_scroll_line_down: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+down` or `ctrl+shift+j`]
:sc_scroll_line_up: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+up` or `ctrl+shift+k`]
:sc_scroll_page_down: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+page_down`]
:sc_scroll_page_up: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+page_up`]
:sc_second_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+2`]
:sc_seventh_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+7`]
:sc_show_scrollback: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+h`]
:sc_sixth_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+6`]
:sc_tenth_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+0`]
:sc_third_window: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+3`]
:sc_toggle_fullscreen: pass:quotes[`ctrl+shift+f11`]
// END_SHORTCUT_BLOCK

++++
<img align="left" role="left" src="logo/kitty.png?raw=true"/>
++++
image::https://travis-ci.org/kovidgoyal/kitty.svg?branch=master[Build status, link=https://travis-ci.org/kovidgoyal/kitty]

== Major Features

* Supports tiling multiple terminal windows side by side in different
layouts without needing to use an extra program like tmux

* Supports all modern terminal features: graphics (images), unicode,
true-color, OpenType ligatures, mouse protocol, focus tracking, bracketed paste and so on.

* Supports startup sessions which allow you to specify the window/tab layout,
working directories and programs to run on startup.

* Uses OpenGL for rendering, offloads rendering to the GPU for lower system
load and buttery smooth scrolling. Uses threaded rendering to minimize input
latency.

* Cross-platform support: kitty currently works on Linux and macOS, but because
it uses only OpenGL for rendering, it should be trivial to port to other
platforms.

* Allows you to open the scrollback buffer and window contents in a separate
window using arbitrary programs of your choice. This is useful for browsing
the history comfortably in a pager or editor and also for doing things like
opening URLs using only the keyboard.

* Easily hackable (UI layer written in python, inner loops in C for
speed). Less than fifteen thousand lines of code.

image::screenshot.png?raw=true[Screenshot, showing three programs in the "Tall" layout]

toc::[]


== Installation

kitty is designed to run from source, for easy hackability. Make sure
the following dependencies are installed first.

=== Dependencies

* python >= 3.5
* harfbuzz >= 1.5.0
* libunistring
* zlib
* libpng
* freetype (not needed on macOS)
* fontconfig (not needed on macOS)
* ImageMagick (optional, needed to use the `kitty icat` tool to display images in the terminal)
* gcc or clang (required only for building)
* pkg-config (required only for building)
* For building on linux in addition to the above dependencies you might also need to install the `-dev` packages for `xcursor`, `xrandr`, `xinerama` and `xkbcommon-x11`, if they are not already installed by your distro.

=== Install and run from source

....
git clone https://github.com/kovidgoyal/kitty && cd kitty
....

Now build the C parts of kitty with the following command:

....
python3 setup.py build
....

You can run kitty, as:

....
python3 /path/to/kitty/folder
....

=== Linux packages

* Arch Linux: AUR git package https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/kitty-git/

* Arch Linux: AUR stable package https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/kitty/

* NixOS / nixpkgs: https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/pkgs/applications/misc/kitty/default.nix


=== macOS packages

kitty is available as a macOS `dmg` file for easy installation from the
link:../../releases[releases page].  You can also run kitty directly from
source using the above install from source instructions, after installing its
dependencies using http://brew.sh/[brew] or a similar package manager.


== Design philosophy

kitty is designed for power keyboard users. To that end all its controls
work with the keyboard (although it fully supports mouse interactions as
well). Its configuration is a simple, human editable, single file for
easy reproducibility (I like to store config files in source control).

The code in kitty is designed to be simple, modular and hackable. It is
written in a mix of C (for performance sensitive parts) and Python (for
easy hackability of the UI). It does not depend on any large and complex
UI toolkit, using only OpenGL for rendering everything.

Finally, kitty is designed from the ground up to support all modern
terminal features, such as unicode, true color, bold/italic fonts, text
formatting, etc. It even extends existing text formatting escape codes,
to add support for features not available elsewhere, such as colored and
styled (curly) underlines. One of the design goals of kitty is to be
easily extensible so that new features can be added in the future with
relatively less effort.

== Tabs and Windows

kitty is capable of running multiple programs organized into tabs and
windows. The top level of organization is the _Tab_. Each tab consists
of one or more _windows_. The windows can be arranged in multiple
different layouts, like windows are organized in a tiling window
manager. The keyboard controls (which are all customizable) for tabs and
windows are:

[[scrolling-shortcuts]]
[options="header"]

=== Scrolling

|===
|Action |Shortcut

|Scroll line up   | {sc_scroll_line_up}
|Scroll line down | {sc_scroll_line_down}
|Scroll page up   | {sc_scroll_page_up}
|Scroll page down | {sc_scroll_page_down}
|Scroll to top    | {sc_scroll_home}
|Scroll to bottom | {sc_scroll_end}

|===

[options="header"]

=== Tabs

|===
|Action |Shortcut

|New tab   | {sc_new_tab}
|Close tab | {sc_close_tab}
|Next tab  | {sc_next_tab}
|Previous tab | {sc_previous_tab}
|Next layout | {sc_next_layout}
|Move tab forward | {sc_move_tab_forward}
|Move tab backward | {sc_move_tab_backward}

|===


[options="header"]

=== Windows

|===
|Action |Shortcut

|New window   | {sc_new_window}
|New OS window| {sc_new_os_window}
|Close window | {sc_close_window}
|Next window  | {sc_next_window}
|Previous window | {sc_previous_window}
|Move window forward | {sc_move_window_forward}
|Move window backward | {sc_move_window_backward}
|Move window to top | {sc_move_window_to_top}
|Focus specific window (windows are counted clockwise from the top left corner) | {sc_first_window}, {sc_second_window} ... {sc_tenth_window}

|===

=== Miscellaneous

|===
|Action |Shortcut

|Increase font size   | {sc_increase_font_size}
|Decrease font size   | {sc_decrease_font_size}
|Restore font size    | {sc_restore_font_size}
|Toggle fullscreen    | {sc_toggle_fullscreen}
|Pass current selection to program | {sc_pass_selection_to_program}
|===



== The scrollback buffer

kitty supports scrolling back to view history, just like most terminals. You
can use either the <<scrolling-shortcuts,keyboard shortcuts>> or the mouse
scroll wheel to do so.  However, kitty has an extra, neat feature. Sometimes you
need to explore the scrollback buffer in more detail, maybe search for some
text or refer to it side-by-side while typing in a follow-up command. kitty
allows you to do this by pressing the {sc_show_scrollback} key-combination,
which will open the scrollback buffer in a new window, using your favorite
pager program (which is `less` by default). You can then explore the scrollback
buffer using whatever program you normally use. Colors and text formatting are
preserved.


== Miscellaneous features

You can double click to select a word and triple click to select a line. You can also
hold down `ctrl+shift` and click on a URL to open it in a browser.


== Layouts

Currently, there are three layouts available,

* Stack -- Only a single maximized window is shown at a time
* Tall -- One window is shown full height on the left, the rest of the windows are shown one below the other on the right.
* Grid -- All windows are shown in a grid

You can switch between layouts using the {sc_next_layout} key combination.

Writing a new layout only requires about fifty lines of code, so if there is
some layout you want, take a look at link:kitty/layout.py[layout.py] and submit
a pull request!


== Configuration

kitty is highly customizable, everything from keyboard shortcuts, to
painting frames-per-second. See the heavily commented
link:kitty/kitty.conf[default config file]. By default kitty looks for a
config file in the OS config directory (usually
`~/.config/kitty/kitty.conf` on Linux and
`~/Library/Preferences/kitty/kitty.conf` on macOS) but you can pass a specific
path via the `--config` option.

== Startup Sessions

You can control the tabs, window layout, working directory, startup
programs, etc. by creating a "session" file and using the `--session`
command line flag. For example:

....
# Set the window layout for the current tab
layout tall
# Set the working directory for windows in the current tab
cd ~
# Create a window and run the specified command in it
launch zsh
launch vim
# Set the title for the next window
title Chat with x
launch irssi --profile x

# Create a new tab (the part after new_tab is the optional tab name which will
# be displayed in the tab bar, if omitted, the title of the active window will
# be used instead)
new_tab my tab
cd ~/somewhere
# Set the layouts allowed in this tab
enabled_layouts tall, stack
# Set the current layout
layout stack
launch zsh
# Make the current window the active (focused) window
focus
launch emacs
....

== Protocol Extensions

kitty has a few extensions to the xterm protocol, to enable advanced features,
see link:protocol-extensions.asciidoc[Protocol Extensions].


== Font control

kitty has extremely flexible and powerful font selection features. You can
specify individual families for the regular, bold, italic and bold+italic
fonts. You can even specify specific font families for specific ranges of
unicode characters. This allows precise control over text rendering. It can
come in handy for applications like powerline, without the need to use patched
fonts. See the various font related configuration directives in the
link:kitty/kitty.conf[config file].

== Performance

The main goals for kitty performance are user perceived latency while typing
and "smoothness" while scrolling as well as CPU usage. kitty tries hard to find
an optimum balance for these. To that end it keeps a cache of each rendered
glyph in video RAM so that font rendering is not a bottleneck.  Interaction
with child programs takes place in a separate thread from rendering, to improve
smoothness.

There are two parameters you can tune to adjust the performance. ``repaint_delay``
and ``input_delay``. These control the artificial delays introduced into the
render loop to reduce CPU usage. See the link:kitty/kitty.conf[config file] for details.

You can generate detailed per-function performance data using
link:https://github.com/gperftools/gperftools[gperftools]. Build kitty with the
`--profile` flag which will create an executable called `kitty-profile`.  Run
that and perform the task you want to analyse, for example, scrolling a large
file with `less`. After you quit, function call statistics will be printed to
`stdout` and you can use tools like *kcachegrind* for more detailed analysis.

Here are some CPU usage numbers for the task of scrolling a file continuously in less.
The CPU usage is for the terminal process and X together and is measured using htop.
The measurements are taken at the same font and window size for all terminals on a
`Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-4820K CPU @ 3.70GHz` CPU with a
`Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. [AMD/ATI] Cape Verde XT [Radeon HD 7770/8760 / R7 250X]` GPU.

|===
| Terminal | CPU usage (X + terminal)

| kitty    | 6 - 8%
| xterm    | 5 - 7% (but scrolling was extremely janky)
| termite  | 10 - 13%
| urxvt    | 12 - 14%
| gnome-terminal | 15 - 17%
| konsole  | 29 - 31%

|===

As you can see, kitty uses much less CPU than all terminals, except xterm, but
its scrolling "smoothness" is much better than that of xterm (at least to my,
admittedly biased, eyes).

== Note for Linux/macOS packagers

While kitty does use python, it is not a traditional python package, so please do not install it in site-packages.
Instead run,

```
python3 setup.py linux-package
```

This will install kitty into the directory `linux-package`. You can run kitty
with `linux-package/bin/kitty`.  All the files needed to run kitty will be in
`linux-package/lib/kitty`. The terminfo file will be installed into
`linux-package/share/terminfo`. Simply copy these files into `/usr` to install
kitty. In other words, `linux-package` is the staging area into which kitty is
installed. You can choose a different staging area, by passing the `--prefix`
argument to `setup.py`.

You should probably split kitty into two packages, `kitty-terminfo` that
installs the terminfo file and `kitty` that installs the main program.
This allows users to install the terminfo file on servers into which they ssh,
without needing to install all of kitty.

This applies to creating packages for kitty for macOS package managers such as
brew or MacPorts as well.


== Frequently Asked Questions

=== Some special symbols are rendered small/truncated in kitty?

The number of cells a unicode character takes up are controlled by the
`wcwidth()` system function. If wcwidth() returns 2 then kitty will render the
character in two cells, otherwise it will render it in one cell. Often the
system `wcwidth()` is old/outdated. You can use the `use_system_wcwidth=no`
setting in your kitty.conf to workaround this. But note that it might cause
other issues, since now kitty and the programs running inside it may not agree
on how wide characters should be. When a symbol does not fit, it will either be
rescaled to be smaller or truncated (depending on how much extra space it
needs). This is often different from other terminals which just let the
character overflow into neighboring cells, leading to ugly artifacts.

In addition to the problem with `wcwidth()` above, some programs, like
powerline, vim with fancy gutter symbols/status-bar, etc. use unicode
characters from the private use area to represent symbols. Often these symbols
are square and should be rendered in two cells.  However, since private use
area symbols all have `wcwdith() == 1` kitty renders them either smaller or
truncated. The correct solution for this is to use either use different symbols
that are not square, or to use a font that defines ligatures with the space
character for these symbols. See
link:https://github.com/kovidgoyal/kitty/issues/182[#182] for a discussion of
the approach using ligatures.

=== How do I build kitty.app on macOS?

You dont need to build kitty.app to run kitty from source. Simply install the dependencies
listed above using brew/MacPorts or similar and then compile and run with:

```
make
python3 .
```

You can also create a shell script to run kitty:

```
#!/bin/sh
exec python3 /path/to/kitty/source/dir
```

And using something like link:https://mathiasbynens.be/notes/shell-script-mac-apps[app-wrapper-for-shell-script]
you can create a simple launcher app to run the shell script.

If you only want to make some small changes to a python file, you can do that
and simply replace the corresponding file inside an existing kitty.app. (Note
that kitty.app will contain `.pyo` files which are compiled versions of `.py`
files, delete the `.pyo` file and replace it with a `.py` file).

Finally, note that the released kitty.dmg is built automatically by using the
`kitty` branch of
link:https://github.com/kovidgoyal/build-calibre[build-calibre] however, that
is designed to run on linux and is not for the faint of heart.

== A tribute

While over the decades I am sure many people have contributed to the
development of the terminal emulator space, there is one individual in
particular I would like to thank. link:http://invisible-island.net[Thomas E.
Dickey], the creator of xterm.  xterm is the most comprehensive and
feature-rich terminal emulator I have had the pleasure of using. As I worked on
kitty, I ran headlong into more and more gnarly corners of terminal behavior.
On all those occasions, either the excellent documentation at
link:http://invisible-island.net/xterm/ctlseqs/ctlseqs.html[xterm-ctlseqs] or
investigating the behavior and code of xterm or vttest were invaluable tools to
aid my understanding.

My achievements, if any, in developing kitty would not have been possible without
his prior work and the generous sharing of knowledge accumulated over decades.

Thank you.


== Resources on terminal behavior

http://invisible-island.net/xterm/ctlseqs/ctlseqs.html

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C0_and_C1_control_codes

http://vt100.net/
